“Eh bien, mon prince, Gênes et Lucques ne sont plus que des apanages, des estates, de la famille Buonaparte.1 Non, je vous préviens, que si vous ne me dites pas que nous avons la guerre, si vous vous permettez encore de pallier toutes les infamies, toutes les atrocités de cet Antichrist (ma parole, j’y crois)—je ne vous connais plus, vous n’êtes plus mon ami, vous n’êtes plus my faithful slave, comme vous dites. Well, good evening, good evening. Je vois que je vous fais peur, sit down and tell me about it.”*2
   So spoke, in July 1805, the renowned Anna Pavlovna Scherer, maid of honor and intimate of the empress Maria Feodorovna, greeting the important and high-ranking Prince Vassily, the first to arrive at her soirée. Anna Pavlovna had been coughing for several days. She had the grippe, as she put it (grippe was a new word then, used only by rare people). Little notes had been sent out that morning with a red-liveried footman, and on all of them without distinction there was written:
   Si vous n’avez rien de mieux à faire, Monsieur le comte (or mon prince), et si la perspective de passer la soirée chez une pauvre malade ne vous effraye pas trop, je serai charmée de vous voir chez moi entre 7 et 10 heures.†3
   Annette Scherer.
   “Dieu, quelle virulente sortie!”‡4 the entering prince replied, not ruffled in the least by such a reception. He was wearing an embroidered court uniform, stockings, shoes, and stars, and had a bright expression on his flat face.
   He spoke that refined French in which our grandparents not only spoke but thought, and with those quiet, patronizing intonations which are proper to a significant man who has grown old in society and at court. He went over to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, presenting her with his perfumed and shining bald pate, and settled comfortably on the sofa.
   “Avant tout dites-moi, comment vous allez, chère amie.*5 Set me at ease,” he said, without changing his voice and in a tone in which, through propriety and sympathy, one could discern indifference and even mockery.
   “How can one be well…when one suffers morally? Is it possible to remain at ease in our time, if one has any feeling?” said Anna Pavlovna. “You’ll stay the whole evening, I hope?”
   “And the fête at the British ambassador’s? Today is Wednesday. I must put in an appearance,” said the prince. “My daughter will come to fetch me and take me there.”
   “I thought today’s fête was cancelled. Je vous avoue que toutes ces fêtes et tous ces feux d’artifice commencent à devenir insipides.”†6
   “If they had known that you wished it, the fête would have been cancelled,” said the prince, uttering out of habit, like a wound-up clock, things that he did not even wish people to believe.
   “Ne me tourmentez pas. Eh bien, qu’a-t-on décidé par rapport à la dépêche de Novosilzoff?2Vous savez tout.”‡7
   “What can I tell you?” said the prince, in a cold, bored tone. “Qu’a-t-on décidé? On a décidé que Buonaparte a brûlé ses vaisseaux, et je crois que nous sommes en train de brûler les nôtres.”§8
   Prince Vassily always spoke lazily, the way an actor speaks a role in an old play. Anna Pavlovna Scherer, on the contrary, despite her forty years, was brimming with animation and impulses.
   Being an enthusiast had become her social position, and she sometimes became enthusiastic even when she had no wish to, so as not to deceive the expectations of people who knew her. The restrained smile that constantly played on Anna Pavlovna’s face, though it did not suit her outworn features, expressed, as it does in spoiled children, a constant awareness of her dear shortcoming, which she did not wish, could not, and found no need to correct.
   In the midst of a conversation about political doings, Anna Pavlovna waxed vehement.
   “Ah, don’t speak to me of Austria! Maybe I don’t understand anything, but Austria does not want and has never wanted war. She’s betraying us.3 Russia alone must be the savior of Europe. Our benefactor knows his lofty calling and will be faithful to it. That is the one thing I trust in. Our kind and wonderful sovereign is faced with the greatest role in the world, and he is so virtuous and good that God will not abandon him, and he will fulfill his calling to crush the hydra of revolution, which has now become still more terrible in the person of this murderer and villain. We alone must redeem the blood of the righteous one.4 In whom can we trust, I ask you?…England with her commercial spirit will not and cannot understand all the loftiness of the emperor Alexander’s soul. She refused to evacuate Malta.5 She wants to see, she searches for ulterior motives in our acts. What did they say to Novosiltsov? Nothing. They did not, they could not understand the self-denial of our emperor, who wants nothing for himself and everything for the good of the world. And what have they promised? Nothing. And what they did promise will not be done! Prussia has already declared that Bonaparte is invincible and that all Europe can do nothing against him…And I don’t believe a single word of Hardenberg or of Haugwitz.6 Cette fameuse neutralité prussienne, ce n’est qu’un piège.*9 I trust only in God and in the lofty destiny of our dear emperor. He will save Europe!…” She suddenly stopped with a mocking smile at her own vehemence.
  “I think,” the prince said, smiling, “that if they sent you instead of our dear Wintzingerode, you would take the Prussian king’s consent by storm.7 You’re so eloquent! Will you give me tea?”
   “At once. À propos,” she added, calming down again, “I’ll have two very interesting men here tonight, le vicomte de Mortemart, il est allié aux Montmorency par les Rohan,†10 one of the best French families. He’s one of the good émigrés,8 one of the real ones. And then l’abbé Morio‡11 —do you know that profound mind? He’s been received by the sovereign. Do you know him?”
   “Ah! I’ll be very glad,” said the prince. “Tell me,” he added, as if just recalling something and with special casualness, though what he asked about was the main purpose of his visit, “is it true that l’impératrice-mère§12 wants Baron Funke to be named first secretary in Vienna? C’est un pauvre sire, ce baron, à ce qu’il paraît.”#13 Prince Vassily wanted his son to be appointed to this post, which, through the empress Maria Feodorovna, had been solicited for the baron.
   Anna Pavlovna all but closed her eyes as a sign that neither she nor anyone else could judge of the empress’s good pleasure or liking.
   “Monsieur le baron de Funke a été recommandé à l’impératrice-mère par sa soeur,”**14 she merely said in a sad, dry tone. The moment Anna Pavlovna mentioned the empress, her face suddenly presented a profound and sincere expression of devotion and respect, combined with sadness, which happened each time she referred to her exalted patroness in conversation. She said that her majesty had deigned to show Baron Funke beaucoup d’estime,*15 and her eyes again clouded over with sadness.
   The prince lapsed into indifferent silence. Anna Pavlovna, with her courtly and feminine adroitness and ready tact, wanted both to swat the prince for daring to make such a pronouncement about a person recommended to the empress, and at the same time to comfort him.
   “Mais à propos de votre famille,” she said, “do you know that your daughter, since her coming out, fait les délices de tout le monde? On la trouve belle, comme le jour.”†16
   The prince bowed in a sign of respect and gratitude.
   “I often think,” Anna Pavlovna went on after a moment’s silence, moving closer to the prince and smiling tenderly at him, as if to show thereby that the political and social conversations were at an end and a heart-to-heart one was beginning, “I often think how unfairly life’s good fortune is sometimes distributed. Why has fate given you two such nice children (excluding Anatole, your youngest, I don’t like him),” she put in peremptorily, raising her eyebrows, “such lovely children? And you really value them less than anyone and are therefore unworthy of them.”
   And she smiled her rapturous smile.
   “Que voulez-vous? Lavater aurait dit que je n’ai pas la bosse de la paternité,”‡17 said the prince.
   “Stop joking. I wanted to talk seriously with you. You know, I’m displeased with your younger son. Just between us,” her face acquired a sad look, “there was talk about him at her majesty’s, and you were pitied…”
   The prince did not reply, but she fell silent, looking at him significantly, waiting for a reply. Prince Vassily winced.
   “What am I to do?” he said finally. “You know, I did all a father could for their upbringing, and they both turned out des imbéciles. Ippolit is at least an untroublesome fool, but Anatole is a troublesome one. That’s the only difference,” he said, smiling more unnaturally and animatedly than usual, and with that showing especially clearly in the wrinkles that formed around his mouth something unexpectedly coarse and disagreeable.
   “Ah, why do such people as you have children? If you weren’t a father, I’d have nothing to reproach you for,” said Anna Pavlovna, raising her eyes pensively.
   “Je suis votre faithful slave, et à vous seule je puis l’avouer. My children—ce sont les entraves de mon existence.*18 That’s my cross. I explain it that way to myself. Que voulez-vous?…” He paused, expressing with a gesture his submission to cruel fate.
   Anna Pavlovna fell to thinking.
   “Have you never thought of getting your prodigal son Anatole married? They say,” she observed, “that old maids ont la manie des marriages.†19 I don’t feel I have that weakness yet, but I know one petite personne who is very unhappy with her father, une parente à nous, une princesse Bolkonsky.”‡20 Prince Vassily did not reply, though, with the quickness of grasp and memory characteristic of society people, he showed by a nod of the head that he had taken this information into account.
   “No, you know, this Anatole costs me forty thousand a year,” he said, obviously unable to restrain the melancholy course of his thoughts. He paused.
   “How will it be in five years, if it goes on like this? Voilà l’avantage d’être père.§21 Is she rich, this princess of yours?”
   “Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. You know, it’s the famous Prince Bolkonsky,9 already retired under the late emperor and nicknamed ‘the King of Prussia.’ He’s a very intelligent man, but an odd and difficult one. La pauvre petite est malheureuse comme les pierres.#22 She has a brother, Kutuzov’s adjutant, the one who recently married Lise Meinen. He’ll come tonight.”
   “Écoutez, chère Annette,” said the prince, suddenly taking his interlocutor by the hand and pulling it down for some reason. “Arrangez-moi cette affaire et je suis votre faithful slave à tout jamais (slafe—comme mon village headman écrit des reports: f instead of v).**23 She’s from a good family and rich. That’s all I need.”
   And with those free and familiarly graceful movements which distinguished him, he took the maid of honor’s hand, kissed it, and, having kissed it, waved the maid-of-honorly hand a little, sprawled himself in an armchair, and looked away.
   “Attendez,” Anna Pavlovna said, pondering. “Tonight I’ll discuss it with Lise (la femme du jeune Bolkonsky). And maybe something can be settled. Ce sera dans votre famille que je ferai mon apprentissage de vielle fille.” 

Anna Pavlovna’s drawing room gradually began to fill up. The high nobility of Petersburg came, people quite diverse in age and character, but alike in the society they lived in. Prince Vassily’s daughter, the beautiful Hélène, came to fetch her father and go with him to the fête at the ambassador’s. She was wearing a ball gown with a monogram.10 The young little princess Bolkonsky, known as la femme la plus séduisante de Pétersbourg,*25 also came; married the previous winter, she did not go into high society now for reason of her pregnancy, but did still go to small soirées. Prince Ippolit, Prince Vassily’s son, came with Mortemart, whom he introduced; the abbé Morio also came, and many others.
   “Have you seen yet” or “have you made the acquaintance of ma tante?”†26 Anna Pavlovna said to the arriving guests, and led them quite seriously to a little old lady in high ribbons, who had come sailing out of the next room as soon as the guests began to arrive, called them by name, slowly shifting her gaze from the guest to ma tante, and then walked away.
   All the guests performed the ritual of greeting the totally unknown, totally uninteresting and unnecessary aunt. With sad, solemn sympathy, Anna Pavlovna followed their greetings, silently approving of them. To each of them ma tante spoke in the same expressions about his health, her own health, and the health of her majesty, which, thank God, was better that day. All those who went up to her, showing no haste for propriety’s sake, left the little old lady with a feeling of relief after the fulfillment of a heavy obligation, never to approach her again all evening.
   The young princess Bolkonsky came with handwork in a gold-embroidered velvet bag. Her pretty upper lip with its barely visible black mustache was too short for her teeth, but the more sweetly did it open and still more sweetly did it sometimes stretch and close on the lower one. As happens with perfectly attractive women, her flaw—a short lip and half-opened mouth—seemed her special, personal beauty. Everyone felt cheerful looking at this pretty future mother full of health and liveliness, who bore her condition so easily. To old men and to bored, morose young ones it seemed that they themselves came to resemble her, having been with her and spoken with her for a time. Anyone who talked with her and saw her bright little smile at every word and her gleaming white teeth, which showed constantly, thought himself especially amiable that day. And that is what each of them thought.
   The little princess, waddling, went around the table with small, quick steps, her bag of handwork hanging on her arm, and, cheerfully straightening her dress, sat down on the sofa near the silver samovar, looking as though everything she did was a partie de plaisir*27 for her and for everyone around her.
   “J’ai apporté mon ouvrage,”†28 she said, unclasping her reticule and addressing them all together.
   “Look, Annette, ne me jouez pas un mauvais tour,” she turned to the hostess. “Vouz m’avez écrit que c’était une toute petite soirée; voyez comme je suis attifée.”‡29
   And she spread her arms to show her elegant gray, lace-trimmed dress, tied slightly below the breasts with a broad ribbon.
   “Soyez tranquille, Lise, vous serez toujours la plus jolie,”§30 Anna Pavlovna replied.
   “Vous savez, mon mari m’abandonne,” she went on in the same tone, turning to a general, “il va se faire tuer. Dites moi, pourquoi cette vilaine guerre?”#31 she said to Prince Vassily and, not waiting for an answer, turned to Prince Vassily’s daughter, the beautiful Hélène.
   “Quelle délicieuse personne, que cette petite princesse!”**32 Prince Vassily said to Anna Pavlovna.
   Soon after the little princess came a massive, fat young man with a cropped head, in spectacles, light-colored trousers of the latest fashion, a high jabot, and a brown tailcoat. This fat young man was the illegitimate son of a famous courtier from Catherine’s time, Count Bezukhov, who was now dying in Moscow. He did not serve anywhere yet, he had only just arrived from abroad, where he had been educated, and this was his first time in society. Anna Pavlovna greeted him with a nod reserved for people of the lowest hierarchy in her salon. But, despite this greeting of the lowest sort, at the sight of the entering Pierre uneasiness and fear showed in Anna Pavlovna’s face, like that expressed at the sight of something all too enormous and unsuited to the place. Though Pierre was indeed somewhat larger than the other men in the room, this fear could have referred only to the intelligent and at the same time shy, observant, and natural gaze which distinguished him from everyone else in that drawing room.
   “C’est bien aimable à vous, monsieur Pierre, d’être venu voir une pauvre malade,”*33 Anna Pavlovna said to him, exchanging fearful looks with the aunt, to whom she was bringing him. Pierre burbled something incomprehensible and went on searching for something with his eyes. He smiled joyfully, merrily, bowed to the little princess as to a close acquaintance, and went up to the aunt. Anna Pavlovna’s fear was not in vain, because Pierre, without hearing out the aunt’s talk about her majesty’s health, walked away from her. The frightened Anna Pavlovna stopped him with the words:
   “You don’t know the abbé Morio? He’s a very interesting man…” she said.
   “Yes, I’ve heard about his plan for eternal peace,11 and it’s very interesting, but hardly possible…”
   “You think so?…” said Anna Pavlovna, in order to say something, and again turned to her duties as mistress of the house, but Pierre committed the reverse discourtesy. Earlier he had walked away without hearing out a lady who was talking to him; now he held with his conversation a lady who needed to leave him. Lowering his head and spreading his big feet, he began to explain to Anna Pavlovna why he thought that the abbé’s plan was a chimera.
   “We’ll talk later,” Anna Pavlovna said, smiling.
   And, ridding herself of the young man who did not know how to live, she returned to her duties as mistress of the house and went on listening and looking out, ready to come to the rescue at any point where the conversation lagged. As the owner of a spinning mill, having put his workers in their places, strolls about the establishment, watching out for an idle spindle or the odd one squealing much too loudly, and hastens to go and slow it down or start it up at the proper speed—so Anna Pavlovna strolled about her drawing room, going up to a circle that had fallen silent or was too talkative, and with one word or rearrangement set the conversation machine running evenly and properly again. But amidst all these cares there could still be seen in her a special fear for Pierre. She glanced at him concernedly when he went over to listen to what was being talked about around Mortemart and went on to another circle where the abbé was talking. For Pierre, brought up abroad, this soirée of Anna Pavlovna’s was the first he had seen in Russia. He knew that all the intelligentsia of Petersburg was gathered there, and, like a child in a toy shop, he looked everywhere at once. He kept fearing to miss intelligent conversations that he might have listened to. Looking at the self-assured and elegant expressions on the faces gathered here, he kept expecting something especially intelligent. Finally he went up to Morio. The conversation seemed interesting to him, and he stopped, waiting for a chance to voice his thoughts, as young people like to do.
 
   III
   Anna Pavlovna’s soirée got going. The spindles on all sides hummed evenly and ceaselessly. Besides ma tante, next to whom sat only one elderly lady with a thin, weepy face, somewhat alien to this brilliant company, the company had broken up into three circles. In one, mostly masculine, the center was the abbé in another, of young people, it was the beautiful Princess Hélène, Prince Vassily’s daughter, and the pretty, red-cheeked little princess Bolkonsky, too plump for her age. In the third, it was Mortemart and Anna Pavlovna.
   The viscount was a nice-looking young man, with soft features and manners, obviously regarded himself as a celebrity, but, from good breeding, modestly allowed himself to be made use of by the company in which he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously treating her guests to him. As a good maître d’hôtel presents, as something supernaturally excellent, a piece of beef one would not want to eat if one saw it in the dirty kitchen, so that evening Anna Pavlovna served up to her guests first the viscount, then the abbé, as something supernaturally refined. In Mortemart’s circle the conversation turned at once to the murder of the duc d’Enghien.12 The viscount said that the duc d’Enghien had perished from his own magnanimity and that there were special reasons for Bonaparte’s viciousness.
   “Ah, voyons. Contez-nous cela, vicomte,”*34 said Anna Pavlovna, joyfully sensing that something à la Louis XV echoed in this phrase, “contez-nous cela, vicomte.”
   The viscount bowed as a sign of submission and smiled politely. Anna Pavlovna circled around the viscount and invited everyone to listen to his story.
   “Le vicomte a été personellement connu de monseigneur,” Anna Pavlovna whispered to one. “Le vicomte est un parfait conteur,” she said to another. “Comme on voit l’homme de la bonne compagnie,”†35 she said to a third; and the viscount was presented to the company in a most refined and advantageous light, like a roast beef on a hot platter sprinkled with herbs.
   The viscount was just about to begin his story and smiled subtly.
   “Come over here, chère Hélène,” Anna Pavlovna said to the beautiful princess, who was sitting some way off, forming the center of another circle.
   Princess Hélène was smiling; she got up with the same unchanging smile of a perfectly beautiful woman with which she had entered the drawing room. Lightly rustling her white ball gown trimmed with ivy and moss, her white shoulders gleaming, her hair and diamonds shining, she walked straight on between the parted men, not looking at anyone, but smiling to everyone, and as if kindly granting each of them the right to admire the beauty of her figure, her full shoulders, her very exposed bosom and back, as the fashion then was, and, as if bringing with her the brilliance of a ball, approached Anna Pavlovna. Hélène was so good-looking that there was not only not a trace of coquetry to be seen in her, but, on the contrary, it was as if she was embarrassed by her unquestionable and all too strongly and triumphantly effective beauty. It was as if she wished but was unable to diminish the effect of her beauty.
   “Quelle belle personne!”*36 said everyone who saw her. As if struck by something extraordinary, the viscount shrugged his shoulders and lowered his eyes while she was seating herself before him and shining upon him that same unchanging smile.
   “Madame, je crains pour mes moyens devant un pareil auditoire,”†37 he said, inclining his head with a smile.
   The princess rested the elbow of her bare, rounded arm on a little table and did not find it necessary to say anything. She waited, smiling. Throughout the story she sat erect, glancing occasionally now at her rounded, beautiful arm lying lightly on the table, now at the still more beautiful bosom on which she straightened a diamond necklace; she also straightened the folds of her gown several times, and, when the story produced an impression, turned to look at Anna Pavlovna and at once assumed the same expression as on the maid of honor’s face, and then settled back into a radiant smile. After Hélène, the little princess also came over from the tea table.
   “Attendez-moi, je vais prendre mon ouvrage,” she said. “Voyons, à quoi pensez-vous?” she turned to Prince Ippolit. “Apportez-moi mon reticule.”‡38
   The princess, smiling and talking with everyone, suddenly effected the transposition, and, taking a seat, cheerily settled herself.
   “Now I feel good,” she said several times, and, asking them to begin, started to work.
Prince Ippolit fetched her reticule, came after her, and, moving his chair towards her, sat down close by.
   Le charmant Hippolyte was striking in his extraordinary resemblance to his beautiful sister, and still more in being strikingly unattractive, despite that resemblance. The features of his face were the same as his sister’s, but in her everything was lit up by her joyous, self-contented, young, unchanging smile and the extraordinary classical beauty of her body. In her brother, on the contrary, the same face was clouded by idiocy and invariably expressed a self-assured peevishness, and his body was skinny and weak. His eyes, nose, and mouth all seemed to shrink into an indefinite and dull grimace, and his arms and legs always assumed an unnatural position.
   “Ce n’est pas une histoire des revenants?”*39 he said, sitting down near the princess and hastily affixing a lorgnette to his eyes, as if he was unable to start talking without this instrument.
   “Mais non, mon cher,”†40 the surprised storyteller said, shrugging his shoulders.
   “C’est que je déteste les histoires des revenants,”‡41 said Prince Ippolit in such a tone that it was clear he had said these words and only then understood what they meant.
   Because of the self-assurance with which he spoke, no one could make out whether what he had said was very clever or very stupid. He was wearing a dark green tailcoat, trousers the color of cuisse de nymphe effrayée,§42 as he said himself, stockings and shoes.
   The vicomte told very nicely the then current anecdote that the duc d’Enghien had secretly gone to Paris to meet with Mlle George, and that there he had met Bonaparte, who also enjoyed the famous actress’s favors, and that there, having met the duke, Napoleon happened to fall into one of those faints he was prone to and found himself in the duke’s power, which the duke did not take advantage of, and that Bonaparte afterwards revenged himself for this magnanimity with the duke’s death.
   The story was very nice and interesting, especially the moment when the rivals suddenly recognized each other, and the ladies, it seemed, were stirred.
   “Charmant,” said Anna Pavlovna, looking questioningly at the little princess.
   “Charmant,” whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her work as if to signify that the interest and charm of the story kept her from going on working.
   The viscount appreciated this silent praise and, smiling gratefully, began to go on; but at that moment Anna Pavlovna, who kept glancing at the young man she found so frightening, noticed that his conversation with the abbé was much too loud and vehement, and she rushed to the rescue at the place of danger. Indeed, Pierre had managed to strike up a conversation with the abbé about political balance, and the abbé, obviously intrigued by the young man’s simplehearted vehemence, was developing his favorite idea before him. The two men listened and talked too animatedly and naturally, and it was this that Anna Pavlovna did not like.
   “The means are European balance and the droit des gens,”*43 the abbé was saying. “Let a powerful state like Russia, famous for its barbarism, stand disinterestedly at the head of a union having as its purpose the balance of Europe—and it will save the world!”
   “How are you going to find such balance?” Pierre began; but just then Anna Pavlovna came over and, with a stern glance at Pierre, asked the Italian how he was taking the local climate. The Italian’s face suddenly changed and acquired an insultingly false sweetness of expression, which was probably habitual with him in conversations with women.
   “I’m so enchanted with the charms of the intelligence and cultivation of society, especially the women’s, where I have had the happiness to be received, that I have not yet had time to think about the climate,” he said.
   Not letting go of the abbé and Pierre, Anna Pavlovna, the better to keep an eye on them, joined them to the general circle.
   Just then a new person entered the drawing room. This new person was the young Prince Andrei Bolkonsky, the little princess’s husband. Prince Bolkonsky was of medium height, a rather handsome young man with well-defined and dry features. Everything in his figure, from his weary, bored gaze to his quiet, measured gait, presented the sharpest contrast with his small, lively wife. Obviously, he not only knew everyone in the drawing room, but was also so sick of them that it was very boring for him to look at them and listen to them. Of all the faces he found so boring, the face of his pretty wife seemed to be the one he was most sick of. With a grimace that spoiled his handsome face, he turned away from her. He kissed Anna Pavlovna’s hand and, narrowing his eyes, looked around at the whole company.
   “Vous vous enrôlez pour la guerre, mon prince?”†44 said Anna Pavlovna.
   “Le général Koutouzoff,” said Bolkonsky, emphasizing the last syllable, zoff, like a Frenchman, “a bien voulu de moi pour aide-de-camp…”‡45
   “Et Lise, votre femme?”§46
   “She’ll go to the country.”
   “Shame on you to deprive us of your lovely wife.”
   “André,” said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettish tone in which she addressed others, “what a story the viscount told us about mademoiselle George and Bonaparte!”
   Prince Andrei closed his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who had not taken his joyful, friendly eyes off Prince Andrei since he entered the drawing room, went up to him and took his arm. Prince Andrei, without turning around, wrinkled his face into a grimace, expressing vexation at whoever had taken his arm, but, seeing Pierre’s smiling face, suddenly smiled an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
   “Well, well!…So you, too, are in high society!” he said to Pierre.
   “I knew you’d be here,” Pierre replied. “I’ll come to you for supper,” he added softly, so as not to interfere with the viscount, who was going on with his story. “May I?”
   “No, you may not,” Prince Andrei said, laughing, letting Pierre know by the pressure of his hand that there was no need to ask. He was about to say more, but just then Prince Vassily and his daughter rose, and the men stood up to let them pass.
   “You will excuse me, my dear viscount,” Prince Vassily said to the Frenchman, gently pulling him down on his chair by the sleeve, so that he would not stand up. “This unfortunate fête at the ambassador’s deprives me of my pleasure and interrupts you. I’m very sorry to leave your delightful soirée,” he said to Anna Pavlovna.
   His daughter, Princess Hélène, lightly holding the folds of her gown, walked between the chairs, and the smile shone still more brightly on her beautiful face. Pierre looked with enraptured, almost frightened eyes at this beauty as she walked past him.
   “Very good-looking,” said Prince Andrei.
   “Very,” said Pierre.
   Passing by, Prince Vassily seized Pierre by the hand and turned to Anna Pavlovna.
   “Educate this bear for me,” he said. “He’s been living with me for a month, and this is the first time I’ve seen him in society. Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the company of intelligent women.”